BASIC COMMANDS

man {command} - Display help pages of {command}
>> {file} - Append to file (add to the specified file), preserving existing contents
> {file} - Output to file, overwriting existing contents
echo - Display text
sudo {command} - Run in superuser mode

FILE PERMISSION

chmod - Changes the read, write, executable permission
touch -Create a file

FILE MANAGEMENT

find - Search for a file
ls - List content of directory
rm - Removes files and directory
cp - Copy files or directory
mv - Move files or directory
du - Disk usage

FILE EDITOR

vi - Open the virtual text editor

The Linux text editor (vim)
- The default editor that comes with the UNIX operating system is called vi (visual editor).
-Using vi editor, we can edit an existing file or create a new file from scratch.
-We can also use this editor to just read a text file.

Modes of Operation in vi editor

Command Mode
-When vi starts up, it is in Command Mode.
-This mode is where vi interprets any characters we type as commands and thus does not display them in the window.
-This mode allows us to move through a file, and to delete, copy, or paste a piece of text.
-To enter Command Mode from any other mode, it requires pressing the [Esc] key.
-If we press [Esc] when we are already in Command Mode, then vi will beep or flash the screen.

Insert mode
-This mode enables you to insert text into the file.
-Everything that’s typed in this mode is interpreted as input and finally, it is put in the file.
-The vi always starts in command mode.
-To enter text, you must be in insert mode.
-To come in insert mode, you simply type i.
-To get out of insert mode, press the Esc key, which will put you back into command mode.

Last Line Mode (Escape Mode)
-Line Mode is invoked by typing a colon [:], while vi is in Command Mode.
-The cursor will jump to the last line of the screen and vi will wait for a command.
-This mode enables you to perform tasks such as saving files, executing commands.

Starting the vi Editor
Creates a new file if it already not exist, otherwise opens existing file.

vi filename - Opens an existing file in read only mode.
vi -R filename - Opens an existing file in read only mode.
view filename - Moving within a File (Navigation)

TO MOVE AROUND within a file without affecting text must be in command mode (press Esc twice). Here are some of the commands can be used to move around one character at a time.
k - moves the cursor up one line
j - moves the cursor down one line
h - moves the cursor to the left one character position
l - moves the cursor to the right one character position
0 or | - positions cursor at beginning of the line
$ - positions cursor at end of the line
W - positions cursor to the next word
B - positions cursor to the previous word
( - positions cursor to beginning of current sentence
) - positions cursor to beginning of next sentence
H - move to top of screen
nH - moves to nth line from the top of the screen
M - move to middle of screen
L - move to bottom of screen
nL - moves to nth line from the bottom of the screen
colon along with x - colon followed by a number would position the cursor on line number represented by x.

